Apps Documentation (#535)
akeneo/pim-api-docs: content/apps/using-oauth2.md

# Using OAuth 2.0 to connect an App

The PIM uses OAuth 2.0 to manage the authorization of Apps.

![App activation diagram](../img/apps/app-activation-sequence-diagram.png)

## Credentials

To begin, you must obtain valid OAuth 2.0 client credentials by registering your App on the
[Akeneo Marketplace](https://marketplace.akeneo.com/node/add/extension).

Then, when any user want to connect his PIM to your App, the authorization process will go through the following steps.

::: info
In the following examples, we will use those fictional urls:  
`https://my-pim.cloud.akeneo.com` for the PIM  

> `https://my-app.example.com/oauth/activate` for your App Activatio*n* URL  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`https://my-app.example.com/oauth/activate` for your App Activation URL  
```

Author: the fuck

`https://my-app.example.com/oauth/callback` for your App Callback URL
::::

## Activation URL

Your App must expose an activation URL.  
When the PIM user sees your App in his PIM marketplace, he can click on the "Connect" button
and he will be redirected to this activation URL with the PIM URL in the query.

```

https://my-app.example.com/oauth/activate?pim_url=https%3A%2F%2Fmy-pim.cloud.akeneo.com
```

## Authorization Request

The user landed on your Activation URL and when you are ready to do so, you must start the Authorization Request.
Like any other OAuth 2.0 application, you simply have to redirect the user to the Authorization Server (the PIM)

> with the following parameters:

Reviewer: Precise which ones are mandatory and optional?

```

https://my-pim.cloud.akeneo.com/connect/apps/v1/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    client_id=[OAUTH_CLIENT_ID]&
    redirect_uri=[CALLBACK_URL]&
    scope=[REQUESTED_SCOPES]&
    state=[STATE]
```

::: info
You can consult the list of [availables scopes](https://help.akeneo.com).
::::

::: warning
To protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you should send a random string in the `state` parameter.
:::

## Authorization Response

The user will now have the opportunity to accept your authorization request and grant you the requested scopes.
When he does so, he is redirected to the callback URL with the following parameters:

```

https://my-app.example.com/oauth/callback?
    code=[AUTHORIZATION_CODE]&
    state=[STATE]
```

::: warning

> To protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you must validate that the received state is identical

Reviewer: to be consistent with previous warning :
```suggestion
To protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you should validate that the received state is identical
```

Author: Using a `state` in OAuth 2.0 is optional.
You *should* send a state
You *must* validate the received state.

What do you think of:
```
If you used a state to protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you must validate that the received state is identical.
```

Reviewer: sounds good for me

# Using OAuth 2.0 to connect an App

The PIM uses OAuth 2.0 to manage the authorization of Apps.

> ![App activation diagram](../img/apps/app-activation-sequence-diagram.png)

Reviewer 2: On the diagram, you would remove the bubble with 'User consent blabla' and be more explicit on the 4. user action by changing the text ''Confirm scope authorization" or something like that.
As this diagram destination is the developer's community, I would enhance it with more technical details like the requests and responses details. What do you think?

Author: I think it should not include the requests and responses, those are already documented, step by step, in the same page.

## Credentials

To begin, you must obtain valid OAuth 2.0 client credentials by registering your App on the

> [Akeneo Marketplace](https://marketplace.akeneo.com/node/add/extension).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client credential is a pair of client id and client secret.
```
You mention the client_id later but you don't explain where it comes from. Should be clearer if you refer it here.

Author: Do you think it needs to be clarified here ?
When you ask for client credentials on the marketplace, you have a huge screen saying:
"Here is your client_id and client_secret, keep them."

Author: Also, any OAuth library ask for those `client_id` and `client_secret`

Reviewer 2: It's just a sentence to be sure we are the clearer as possible. I would add it.

Author: Ok.

@meganelepalud-akeneo, do you want to check the wording of the following new sentence ?
```
The client credentials are composed of a pair of `client_id` and `client_secret`.
```

Then, when any user want to connect his PIM to your App, the authorization process will go through the following steps.

::: info

> In the following examples, we will use those fictional urls:  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following examples, we will use these fictional URLs:  
```
[for the context if interested](http://www.differencebetween.net/language/difference-between-these-and-those/)

`https://my-pim.cloud.akeneo.com` for the PIM  
`https://my-app.example.com/oauth/activate` for your App Activation URL  

> `https://my-app.example.com/oauth/callback` for your App Callback URL

Author: FYI, https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Example.com

Also, for `akeneo.com` vs `akeneo.test`, what's the issue ?

> `https://my-app.example.com/oauth/callback` for your App Callback URL

Reviewer 2: it's ok for me!

::::

## Activation URL

> Your App must expose an activation URL.  
> When the PIM user sees your App in his PIM marketplace, he can click on the "Connect" button
> and he will be redirected to this activation URL with the PIM URL in the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your App must expose an activation URL.

The Akeneo PIM user has access to an App marketplace in his PIM. When he connects your App from its PIM, he will be redirected to the activation URL you provided. You will receive in the query the URL of the PIM where he comes from.
```

Reviewer 4: Akeneo PIM users have access to an App marketplace in their PIM. When they connect your App from their PIM, they are redirected to the activation URL you provided. The PIM URL they come from is in the query you receive.

```

https://my-app.example.com/oauth/activate?pim_url=https%3A%2F%2Fmy-pim.cloud.akeneo.com
```

## Authorization Request

The user landed on your Activation URL and when you are ready to do so, you must start the Authorization Request.

> Like any other OAuth 2.0 application, you simply have to redirect the user to the Authorization Server (the PIM)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Like any other OAuth 2.0 application, you have to redirect the user to the Authorization Server (Akeneo PIM)
```

with the following parameters:

- `response_type` (required, must always be "code")
- `client_id` (required)

> - `redirect_uri` (optional)

Reviewer 2: shouldn't it be required?

Author: good question aaaand houston, we have a small problem.
This is a part we've done wrong.

According to the spec, the redirect_uri should be optional and should be validated against a whitelist (or a single one) of callback urls.

We do none of the 2, I've already added a ticket in the backlog.

- `scope` (optional)
- `state` (recommended)

```

https://my-pim.cloud.akeneo.com/connect/apps/v1/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    client_id=[OAUTH_CLIENT_ID]&
    redirect_uri=[CALLBACK_URL]&
    scope=[REQUESTED_SCOPES]&
    state=[STATE]
```

::: info

> You can consult the list of [availables scopes](https://help.akeneo.com).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can consult the list of [available scopes](https://help.akeneo.com).
```

::::

::: warning
To protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you should send a random string in the `state` parameter.
:::

## Authorization Response

> The user will now have the opportunity to accept your authorization request and grant you the requested scopes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The user now has the opportunity to accept your authorization request and grant you the requested scopes.
```

> When he does so, he is redirected to the callback URL with the following parameters:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When they end the activation process, they are redirected to the callback URL with the following parameters:
```

```

https://my-app.example.com/oauth/callback?
    code=[AUTHORIZATION_CODE]&

>     state=[STATE]

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we return the authorized scopes here? The doc about it https://github.com/akeneo/pim-api-docs/pull/536/files#r752949045 should go there

```

::: warning
If you used a state to protect your App from cross-site request forgery, you must validate that the received
state is identical.
:::

## Access Token Request

Now that you have received an authorization code, you can exchange this code against an access token.

The PIM expect the following parameters in the request:
- `client_id` (required)
- `code` (required)
- `grant_type` (required, must always be "authorization_code")
- `code_identifier` (required)
- `code_challenge` (required)
- `redirect_uri` (required, only if included in the Authorization Request)

> ### What's the Code Challenge ?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### What's the Code Challenge?
```

> To validate the App identity, instead of sending your client secret, the PIM requires a code challenge,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To validate the App identity, instead of sending your client secret, Akeneo PIM requires a code challenge,
```

different for each Access Token Request, alongside the OAuth client id.
The code challenge is composed of 2 keys:
- `code_identifier`: high-entropy cryptographic random string
- `code_challenge`: sha256 hash of the concatenation of `code_identifier` and `client_secret`

Here is a PHP example:
```php

$codeIdentifier = bin2hex(random_bytes(30));
$codeChallenge = hash('sha256', $codeIdentifier . '[CLIENT_SECRET]');
```

### Token Request

> From your server, you must do the following request to the PIM REST API,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
From your server, you must make the following request to the PIM REST API
```

on the endpoint `/connect/apps/v1/oauth2/token`:

```

POST /connect/apps/v1/oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: my-pim.cloud.akeneo.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

client_id=[OAUTH_CLIENT_ID]&code_identifier=[CODE_IDENTIFIER]&code_challenge=[CODE_CHALLENGE]
&code=[AUTHORIZATION_CODE]&grant_type=authorization_code
```

### Token Success Response

If your Access Token Request is accepted, you will receive a JSON response with the token:

```json

> {
>   "access_token": "Y2YyYjM1ZjMyMmZlZmE5Yzg0OTNiYjRjZTJjNjk0ZTUxYTE0NWI5Zm",
>   "token_type": "bearer"
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{
  "access_token": "Y2YyYjM1ZjMyMmZlZmE5Yzg0OTNiYjRjZTJjNjk0ZTUxYTE0NWI5Zm",
  "token_type": "bearer"
  "scope": "REQUESTED_SCOPES", 
}
```

```

::: warning
You must **store the access token securely**. If you need to ask for a new one, you have to go through the same steps
and be granted a new access token by the PIM user.
:::

::: info
An Access Token given to an App has no expiration date.  

> However, be aware that it can be revoked at any moment by the PIM user.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, be aware that it can be revoked at any moment by a PIM user.
```

:::

### Token Error Response

If your Access Token Request is refused, you will receive a JSON response with the error:

```json

{
  "error": "[ERROR_CODE]"
}
```

Check the [OAuth 2.0 spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.1.2.1) for the possible error codes.

> **Next step**: we will show you a simple [implementation of this steps with a PHP example](/apps/create-app-in-php.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Next step**: we will show you a simple [implementation of these steps with a PHP example](/apps/create-app-in-php.html).
```

# Using OAuth 2.0 to connect an App

> The PIM uses **OAuth 2.0** to manage the authorization of Apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Akeneo PIM uses **OAuth 2.0** to manage the authorization of Apps.
```
@meganelepalud-akeneo ?
